COMP 3260
Network Security
Assignment No. 3
Date Given: February 17, 2016
Due: February 29, 2016.
Submission: BlackBoard.

NOTES:

•	All references must be properly cited in your answers. Points will be deducted for improper citations and citations in incorrect formats.

•	Keep in mind that just because you cite references, you must not “cut-and-paste” from these or other sources. The essays must be in your own words. You should also cite the references in proper format (IEEE or ACM style).

•	For programming questions, you may use Java, C, C++ or Python only. Please do not use any other programming language. Furthermore, submit source code as well as sample runs of the output. Failure to do so will result in loss of points.

1.	The Vigenère cipher was thought to be completely unbreakable for hundreds of years, and indeed, if very long keys are used the Vigenère cipher can be unbreakable. But if short keys are used, or if we have a lot of ciphertext compared to the key length, the vigenere cipher is quite solvable.
In this assignment you need to study how a cryptanalyst thinks and breaks the code. Applying the Cipher Text Only attack, your job is to break the Vigenère cipher using cryptanalytic techniques and find the key used for the encryption. For this exercise, assume the key length is less than five characters long and only English upper case letters from A-Z are used. You may also assume the plaintext contains only the upper case English letters from A-Z, ignore the space characters.
Write a program that will help you to figure out the key used for Vigenère encrypted file.
You may find this website
(http://practicalcryptography.com/cryptanalysis/stochastic-searching/cryptanalysis-vigenere-cipher/) helpful.
An implementation of the Vigenère cypher (both encryption and decryption) may be found at http://rosettacode.org/wiki/Vigen%C3%A8re_cipher#D

Your program should take a ciphertext file (encrypted using the Vigenère encryption algorithm) as input  and produce an output file where at the first line print the “key” used for the encryption, followed by a decrypted plaintext in it.
Please submit the source code file and a document file containing the information about how to run the program and some sample test run screenshots.
Note: if you find some helpful source codes online or from other sources, please do not copy and paste the source code as it is.  Modify it to meet your requirements and give proper credit to the original author of the source code by siting the author(s) name and the source.

2.	We discussed DES in detail in the lectures. An important standard that has superseded DES in recent years is the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), which is based on the Rijndael  algorithm. Find out information on AES and write a 2-page summary (12 point font, single line spacing, diagrams can be included) on the AES – overview, key generation, encryption process, etc.

3.	Study the note on “The RC4 Stream Encryption Algorithm”. Answer the following:
a.	What RC4 value will leave S unchanged? That is, after the initial permulation of S, the entries of S will be equal to the values from 0 thrugh 255 in asecding order?
b.	RC4 has a secret internal state which is a permutation of all the possible values of the vector S and the two indeces i and j. Using a straightforward scheme to store the internal state, how many bits are used?

4.	Consider the following alternative method of encrypting a message. To encrypt a message, use the algorithm for doing a CBC decrypt. To decrypt a message, use the algorithm for doing a CBC encrypt. Would this work? Explain with illustrations. (Short answer: approximately ½ a page).
